So, for this exercise we'd like you to do
is also get some hands on experience just
like you do with the router.
Go ahead and open up the Pinia docs for
reference because once again,
the docs are a great resource for
helping to debug and
learn more things about the library
as you continue using it.
Then, go ahead and
install Pinia onto the cest-la-vue app and
configure Vue to use it.
Again, it should feel familiar based
on what we just did with Vue router.
Go ahead and then create a stores folder,
and then go ahead and
just create any kind of data store that
you think makes sense for cest-la-vue.
Then once you create your first store,
try to add some state, getters or actions.
And then finally go and call those
things inside of your components.
All right, so as always, if you have
questions, for those watching online,
please feel free to drop that in the chat.
Let's go ahead and run through that.
So, we're going to do this is
let's go ahead and restart and
this time we're going to go
ahead to the cest-la-vue.
And then we're going to install pinia,
that's the first thing we're gonna do.
Once you have that then I can go ahead and
run dev.
I can have that over here, which is great.
Okay, that's working now.
So, once you have Pina installed, what
you gotta do is you gotta configure it.
So, inside of, oops!
I'm in the wrong folder,
inside of cest-la-vue for main.js,
we have here, this is where
we're creating the Vue router.
Let's then go ahead and find createPinia
app functionality from pinia.
So, as you can verify that,
you can always check the autocomplete.
I usually do autocomplete
cuz it just prevents the one
off typing errors that I have,
which you've seen me do on this workshop.
So, once we have that.
Great we can then.
Okay, we have a bunch of router stuff
here let me just collapse that and
then const pinia = createPinia().
And we're gonna do app.use(pinia).
All right, so, now that we have
that enabled we can go ahead and
create our first store.
So, what we're gonna do here, inside of
our components, it looks like, honestly,
the user store makes the most sense.
So, we can go ahead and do userStore.js.
And so, we're gonna go ahead and
import definePinia from pinia.
And then we're gonna export our store,
which is gonna be a const of useUserStore,
and we'll call the define,
not definePinia, my mistake, defineStore.
We've already defined pinia at the app
level now we're defining a specific store.
The store gets what?
It gets two arguments.
One, what are we going to call the store?
Again, keep it simple.
I like to keep it whatever
the file name is.
So, it's userStore and
then we get an option of what?
We get the state which is
a function that returns an object.
We get the getters, and
we have the actions.
Okay.
So, what we can do,
if we take a look at our code is inside
of our views inside of UserPage.
You can see that we're doing quite
a bit here as far as the data goes.
Now, we're importing it currently from
composables, so let's migrate that over,
that's what we're gonna do
in this particular one.
So, inside of composables you'll
see that userList is just a ref.
Well, if that's the case, all we got
to do here is to show you side by
side in our userStore is add a userList
and then just make it an array.
And when we save that,
now when we go inside of our user page,
rather than importing
the user list like this,
what we're gonna do is we're gonna
import the useUserStore from,
and then this should be from
stores/UserStore, just like that.
And so again, let's just double check.
I didn't get the one.
Wait, nope.
Export const useUserStore.
That should be the right one.
We'll find out just momentarily, okay.
So, then we will set up the store by what?
By calling our function.
So, const userStore = useUserStore,
and then we'll go ahead and save that.
And that looks good.
Okay good, now it's actually being
fetched correctly, that's good.
So, now that we have the userStore,
we can get rid of this .value.
No longer that, it's just
userStore.userList, just like that.
So, let's see if that actually worked.
If we refresh, go to the user page,
we'll see something is not working.
Okay, why?
Because guess what?
We're looking at userStore.userList but
inside of our template,
you'll see that we're only
referring to userList directly.
So again, one of the things I like about
the modular way is that it's very clear
about where things are coming from.
Now, for those who really care about
destructuring making your code shorter,
there are ways to do it.
We're not gonna cover it right now because
I do think using it out of the box like
this has its advantages for
being declarative and easy to understand.
So, now that we save this, go ahead and
take a look how that looks.
And there we go,
everything is showing up as expected.
Now, the other things we can possibly
do with this is we wanna go ahead and
practice getting the getters, right?
So, we were doing that on the HomePage,
right here.
So, we go on the App page, we have
the ability to, wait, HomePage is here.
We were looking at something
called shortUserList.
Well, all we can do instead is
actually take this part and we can
shorten the code by saying, okay we gonna
take this calculation that we've done, and
we're going to go to the userStore.
And inside of our getters when
they get a shortUserList, and
we can use an arrow function for
this, we'll get the state and
it'll return state.userList,
and we don't need the value.
And this is the equivalent,
of our computed property.
Now that we have this in here,
we can go back over to our homepage,
which is right here.
And we can actually now just
remove this in its entirety.
And we can then say instead
of import userList,
we're actually gonna import useUserStore.
There you go,
it's auto completed, fantastic.
const userStore = useUserStore(),
we are calling that.
And now that this is available to us,
we can then say,
userStore.shortUserList, save.
So, now we go back to the home.
Oops, there we go, User Home.
There we go, we have our shortlist.
It's all kept in one place.
Now one last thing before we wrap this up
is that we need to actually verify how do
we do actions, right?
And so there was a great question earlier
regarding the fact that if you look at
userStore, you might be tempted to
actually make this part some sort of
asynchronous functionality, right?
Like, I wanna fetch this,
return it into this value.
But when it comes to setting up state and
managing that with composables,
my recommendation for doing that is to
always start with the initial empty state.
That's where that's just start.
And then later on when you're writing
code, you'll have that or go ahead and
override and populate it.
But for now, always try to
avoid the async stuff in here.
Keep that just to the standard data types.
However, what we can do though
is inside of our actions,
this is where we can write
that fetch functionality.
So, where is that
currently living right now?
My guess is it's on UserPage and
sure enough look at this,
async function fetch users.
Let's just steal that entire thing away
because it doesn't need to be here.
So, let's grab that over into
our userStore and drop that in.
Now, this current syntax won't work, why?
Because this is async function when
you're defining it outside of an object.
So, we need to do is actually make fetch
users an async function like this and
then let me try to save it.
It'll format itself a little bit better,
which is great.
And then there we go.
And then you can see we get the fetch
here, we get this response, and
then we get the response.
But, rather than just return it in this
particular case, because in this scenario,
we're saying that this function
is specific to the store.
Actually, you know what?
Take that back.
We're gonna leave it like this.
I'll show you the two ways on why.
So, now we have the fetch users here,
how are we gonna use it?
Well, inside of our UserPage,
we've gone ahead and we've said, okay,
we have the user store, so what can we do?
We can do userStore.fetchUsers.
So, that should do the trick,
user.userList = await
userStore.ser stores fetch users, great.
You'll see now that when we come over and
refresh, everything is working still.
Now, there's also value in
case that you're like, well,
I don't wanna have to manually fetch it.
I wanna just whenever this is called,
go ahead and update this.
So, an alternative model,
there's no right or wrong,
it just depends on what your use case is.
If you go inside of our UserPage,
rather than having to call userList and
assign it, we could do theoretically, if
we just wanna call userStore.fetchUsers.
That's all we wanna do.
But if we do that,
nothing's gonna happen, why?
Because currently inside of our function,
all we're doing is actually running,
the, not that one userStore, great.
You see here,
we're only returning the response.
We're actually not doing much with it.
So, what we need to do instead is
we need to refer to the userList.
And so, unlike the getters,
which gets the state in an arrow function,
because the actions really do require
the entire context of the app,
this is where the this
context comes back into play.
So, we can go this.userList = response.
So, now I want to refresh that you'll
see everything appears, as we expect.
And this is now, again it's tightly
coupled but at the same time, this might
be okay in this particular instance,
because this is the global source.
So, that's actually
probably what we wanna do.
When we fetch users we want
the entire global state to update.
So, basically I would say if you're
writing or composing your functionality in
this way, I think it does make
sense that tightly coupled.
In the event that fetch users has
nothing to do with this and that's for
whatever reason,
it's a separate type of functionality.
That's where it might make sense as a
composable that you import into your store
that does something entirely separate
that then you can, better break up and
compose your code.
So, we're at the tail end of all this.
Obviously, there's a lot more to
cover as there's an entire world and
ecosystem out there.
So, some of the questions that have come
up during this include things like what
about things like design systems,
component libraries?
Well, you're just in luck
because recently, Vuetify,
which is the official library for
doing view components with material
design that has actually been released.
So, if you go to veutify js,
I want to say .org, nope.
Ooh dot com, I messed up.
This is, I think the most popular
component library that the Vue ecosystem
has when it comes to a really well
maintained team that helps to make sure
everything's kept up to date.
As you can see here, they have wonderful
documentation that if you come in here you
can actually take a look at
the different components.
So, you know earlier I was showing
someone the tables down here.
So, you could take a look at something
like a simple data table that
automatically takes in data.
It looks beautiful, you can sort it
without doing any additional work.
This is the kind of thing that you might
wanna check out if you don't have time to
build your own design library and
that kind of thing.
So, Vuetify highly recommended
checking that out.